This video is made possible by Squarespace,
from websites and online stores to marketing tools and analytics.
Squarespace is the all in one platform to build a beautiful online presence and
run your business.
Checkout Squarespace through the link in the description below more on them in a
bit
American inventor, Thomas Edison is often quoted as saying,
genius is 2% inspiration and 98%
perspiration the quote,
which comes in part from a 1902 issue of scientific American has a
clear message. Pure brain power is nothing without hard work and motive.
Our protagonist today had quite a bit of both inspiration and perspiration.
He even liked to read scientific American filo Farnsworth was the Tony stark
of his time,
a natural born tinkerer and visionary who identified what he wanted to invent
and wasted little time before completely shocking the world from his Marke
invention to protracted legal air and substance abuse problems.
This is the quiet, brilliant life of Faloon worth. The electric whiz
Filo Taylor Farmsworth was born in the American west in a rural community in
Southwest in Utah.
He was born to Louis Edwin farm and Serena Amanda Bastian on August the
19th, 19 0 6, 40 years after Butch casidy had been born in the same town beaver,
like a lot of other towns in Utah.
Beaver was a small community with the ubiquitous ties to the Mormon church.
Unlike a lot of other small towns in Utah, beaver was an electrified community.
Small was beaver had active mining and manufacturing economies and enjoyed
access to industrialized transportation.
Since the 1870s, courtesy of the Utah Southern railroad extension,
those features were enough to catch the attention of prominent Western engineer,
Lu nun who began planning and building a hydroelectric power plant right around
the time of funds Worth's birth.
The result was that beaver was the first town in all of Utah to enjoy the
benefits of widespread electric, power science and religion.
Both had big effects on the shaping of the young life of filo.
The church of LA today,
saints shaped him and his two brothers and two sisters and many of the
communities that they all grew up in,
but it was arguably science that had the larger effect either from his early
exposure to electric in beaver, or perhaps just sheer natural curiosity,
Farnsworth, gravitated towards electrical interests and a tinker his mindset.
He was an avid reader of scientific American.
Even at a young age,
filo Farnsworth was sketching out plans on how to completely revolutionize the
electric world. He wasn't old enough to get drafted into world war one,
but he was old enough to start sketching out plans for a new kind of television
that relied solely on electric parts. At age 12,
the Farmsworth family left Utah ought to move to a 240 acre ranch near rig
beyond Ahoe.
And even by his early adolescent,
it's not hyperbole to say that Farnsworth was already something of an electrical
genius like FARs Worth's former community in Utah,
the Rigby ranch was wired for electricity,
and it had generated the powered much of the farm equipment Farnsworth studied
and reverse engineered everything.
Teaching himself the nuts and bolts of how all the items worked.
He became the Ranch's unofficial electrician,
rewinding arm and repairing generators.
On some nights he would intentionally crash the Ranch's electrical system just
so he could repair it and reboot it. One,
2002 book by Paul kins,
a story of how Farmsworth converted his mother's crank powered washing machine
into an electro powered one long distance conversations with relatives over a
new electronic telephone only poured gasoline on the fire.
By the time he was 14, filo was excited to take science classes,
enter Rigby high school though one does have to wonder the value of such classes
for a self starting genius like Farnsworth while his teachers worth doing their
best to provide an early 20th century backgrounds in scientific literacy.
Farnsworth was literally sketching out diagrams on how to build brand new,
never before invented electronic equipment in their classes.
He even showed his diagrams to one of his teachers. Mr. Toman, I wonder,
do you automatically get an a in high school physics?
If you can invent an entirely new kind of cat third radio tube
Farnsworth finished his high school career at Brigham young high school.
Laughter his family moved back to Utah during his later teenage years.
Truthfully Farnsworth really had not thought about much of anything else besides
how to invent a new electronic television as his adolescence wore on the idea
began to consume him.
The only thing that successfully snapped him out of his one track focus was the
death of a parent. His father Lewis died in January of 1924,
filo graduated high school, five months later,
za Farnsworth looking to start a quick career as the eldest male and take care
of the rest of his family applied to the United States Naval academy,
unsurprisingly the up and coming electronics master posted one of the country's
best entrance exam scores.
The military track was just what the doctor warded for a Farnsworth family that
was struggling to make ends meet without patriarch,
but there was one major problem that Farnsworth discovered shortly after joining
the Navy,
any patterns he might register for while a service would automatically become
property of the us government for a guy like Farnsworth,
who was clearly on the brink of a slew of electronic breakthroughs.
This was a pretty major roadblock.
Farnsworth talked his way out of his Navy commitments by utilizing an obscure
provision that allows the eldest child of a fatherless family to leave the
service and return home as a familiar caregiver, return to the family,
which was now living in Provo and began attending Brigham young university.
As you might imagine, his course load was heavy on the sciences,
particularly chemistry and physics, knowing he was an Nu mere beginner.
He tried to jump straight into advanced courses, which BYU would not allow.
He didn't care though. He attended the classes. Anyway,
Farnsworth only stayed at BYU for a few semesters,
but he still got two important things out of attending the school.
For one thing, he got to play around in the college research labs,
which he used to earn a radio nutrition certificate from the national radio
Institute. More importantly,
he met Provo high school student Elma Gardner while he was there and they got
married on may the 27th, 1926. He was 19. She was 18.
The newly words moved to California where aspiring scientist filo set up his
first lab in San Francisco at 202 green street long before the boom and
bustle of Silicon valley.
Farmsworth had designs on completely revolutionizing what electronics could do
for an average American household.
And it's probably here that I should pause on FARs Worth's story and give you
some context on what exactly it was that Farnsworth was trying to do.
The idea of television was not invented by Farnsworth or anyone else in the 20th
century.
It was an idea deep in the roots of the eight hundreds long before Farmsworth
was an erstwhile idea in his young parents heads shortly after the invention of
the Telegraph scientists,
that crafted upgrades that allowed them to transmit still images.
Naturally this flash the potential for a device that could scan and project
images in the 1870s, British Telegraph operator,
Joseph made discovered that selenium responded electronically to light photo and
that more light elicited, a stronger electronic response. Some 10 years later,
a pian engineer living in Germany named Paul Nico theorized a kind of
mechanical forerunner to the television.
It was a pair of spinning discs and a photo electric mosaic.
And they could work in concert to project an image onto a clear glass plate.
NCO obtained a patent for this device,
which came to be known as the nip cow disc, but he never actually built one.
The next 40 years of TV history were marked by scores of aspirational
scientists, chasing Nico's version of what television might look like.
Farnsworth was following a completely different path.
He had complained to teachers years earlier that most everyone was about
inventing the television wrong. And in San Francisco, he had the time,
the knowledge and the lab space to prove it Farnsworth believed Nico's
mechanical approach was flawed and inefficient in its place.
He wanted to pursue an all electronic mechanism for image projection.
To describe the difference in strategies using a more modern metaphor.
It would be like the difference between dissembling an automobile piece by
piece,
then reconstructing it in a different location versus putting the car in an
airplane and flying it to that new destination.
Barely six months after Farmsworth had moved to California,
he had submitted patterns for a number of key inventions,
including an image dissect a camera tube.
That was a major electronic breakthrough.
That was January of 1927 by September Farnsworth had successfully
built and tested on the entire operational system transmitting a simple image of
a straight line to a television receiver in the next room,
true to form Farnsworth. Reportedly explained there you are electric television.
It was as if he had known his whole life that he would invent it.
His laboratory assistance were stunned.
This point he was barely 21 a year later on September. The third,
1928 funds worth had perfected his system enough that he was ready to give an
official demonstration to the press. In 1929,
he removed the last mechanical go parts from the system,
fulfilling his vision of an all electronic television machine.
He began using it to transmit more complex images, not just lines or symbols,
but photos of actual people.
One of the first images he chose to transmit was an image of his wife.
Armor Farnsworth had not created some never before seen machine after all silent
movies where popular in the 1920 is before the great depression and talkies
broke out onto the scene in 1927.
But Farnsworth had created a vision of what the future was going to look like.
Not a mechanical television machine,
but one that ran completely on modern electronic technology.
His new series of patterns laid out the blueprints for what 20th century
television and by extension modern entertainment would look like FAS Worth's
vision, brought him a lot of fame and re reput in the scientific community.
Unfortunately it also brought in one of the chief conflicts of his entire life,
a turf war with RCA. And just before we get into that turf war,
I'd love to take a moment to tell you about Squarespace,
the sponsor of today's video. Now, a couple of simple things,
maybe you've got an, an idea for a website or a business,
even an invention up there in your head and you're thinking, Hmm,
maybe I should try that.
Well to the only way to figure out if it's worth doing is to get it out there to
the world. Although if you're doing an invention, you know,
maybe consider patents first, not a lawyer on that one,
but Squarespace can still be incre incredibly useful if you're starting a
business, but this can all be daunting because you know,
it's scary to go and pursue new things,
but not being able to set up a website is not an excuse.
There are no excuses available with Squarespace.
Squarespace allows you to create a powerful website for whatever you're up to
wanna sell something online. Yes.
Easy to set up a store with Squarespace or starting podcast. Well,
absolutely Squarespace do that.
It all starts on Squarespace with a beautiful template that you customize to
your heart's contempt or start from scratch or easily move over from an
existing domain, making everything super easy to manage,
but don't start from scratch. Just use a template, no excuses.
And once you've gone through the super easy customization process,
there are no updates, no patches, no tech be asked to deal with.
And Squarespace also handles all of the websitey stuff. Like I say,
they do podcasts, but they also do social media integrations, mailing lists,
all that jazz. Like I say,
Squarespace removes the obstacles to your dreams,
go to square com for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch go to
squarespace.com/bio graphics, and you'll save 10% of your first purchase,
our website or a domain and let's get back to it.
So I really hope you found that. So I really hope you found that.
So I really hope you found that. So I really hope you found that in the 1930s,
Farnsworth was dragged into a heated, prolonged pattern war with RCA.
But before we get into all of that,
we need to introduce one of far Worth's chief adversaries,
Russian American immigrants and inventor Vladimir Warkin Zu Warkin was born
in 1888. I Miam Russia as east of present day Moscow.
He studied at the St Petersburg Institute of technology and completed some
post-graduate work in Paris before serving in the Russian signal core during
world war. I, when the Russians civil war broke out,
he immigrated to America much like his younger American counterparts Warkin was
fascinated with the idea of television.
He found work as a scientist with the west house laboratories in Pittsburgh and
was eventually afforded the opportunity to work on perfecting a television
system of his own.
He filed for mechanical patents for smaller derivative television parts in 1923.
And again, in 1925,
just two years before Farnsworth gave his own public demonstration in 1928,
as Warkin gave a demonstration of his own mechanical system in 1926,
which his employers at Westinghouse considered a failure,
his bosses told him to consider moving away from television and refocusing on
problems that were considered to have more practical applications.
He did what his bosses asked filing patterns for unrelated scientific bits and
bobs in 1929 Zukin was not natural born genius like Farnsworth was,
but he wasn't exactly adult either.
He earned a PhD from the university of Pittsburgh in 1926,
he had pioneered an improved cath radio,
which would become a critical component for many 20th century television sets.
And he created a new type of electronic receiver called a Kscope in 1929.
Speaking about it at a, for the Institute of radio engineers.
So war's profile in the field, eventually drew the attention,
a fellow Russian American David Sonoff,
who was operating as the president of the radio corporation of America.
Sonoff offereds war a job in 1930,
giving him an explicit chance to concentrate on what he failed to do.
As a side project Westing house build an all electronic television set.
Zu Warkin took the job in the spring of 1930, but before he moved shops,
he took a visit to the lab of a brilliant west coast electronics engineer named
well, you guest it filo Farnsworth,
Zukin left Farnsworth lab impressed with a number of his electronic inventions,
including mid dissect Warwick focused on trying to recreate it,
but he could never get it quite right.
Eventually after war waved the white flag and took his research in another
direction, RCA resorted to different tactics in 1931,
it tried to buy the rights to far Worth's patents often for a hundred thousand
dollars and incorporate his lab as a new wing of their company.
When he refused their Rafa,
the RCA was ready to take a Boulder and a less friendly approach. Now,
for those of you, who've seen the popular 2008 Marvel film Ironman.
This plot might feel a bit familiar, a young tech genius invents,
a brilliant new technology that's set to revolutionize the world while a
corporate antagonist tries to acquire the technology for his own ends.
If you've seen the film, you won't be surprised to learn what happens next.
RCA decides to play dirty.
David Sonoff RCA never attacked Farmsworth with a giant mechanized robot suit
over Malibu beach,
but they did launch a series of lawsuits aimed at resting control of Farnsworth,
totally legitimate patterns.
The first wave was an interference claiming that wars 1923 patent for an image
dissector should be given priority over Farnsworth.
And RCA was correct about one things war had in fact filed a patent for a dos
dissector in 1923,
but there was zero evidence that he had actually produced a functioning one
until well after his visit to far Worth's lab,
RCA was hoping some combination of legal intimidation and dumb luck would lands
them control of far Worth's unreplicated electronic inventions, but in 1934,
the us patent office ruled in favor of Farnsworth.
RCA continued to pursue its strategy of industrial ESP arch throughout the
1930s,
filing new cases and appeals that dragged the conflict out all the way to the
brink of America's involvement in world war II.
Farnsworth never had too much to worry about legally as his patents were well
organized and explicit, but the ongoing battle with RCA did SAP him of time,
resources and money among the many absurd activities Farnsworth was required to
do while defending his patents was spent several weeks tracking down his old
school teacher, Justin Toman,
to whom he had told of his future invention Toman recall in as much detail as he
could a Blackboard diagram for image dissectors and CA radios,
that Farnsworth would go on to file a pattern. For years later,
eventually RCAs legal pursuits caught up with them and it ran out of options.
David Sonoff desperately wanted his company to be known as the inventors of
electronic television. Instead on September the 15th, 1939,
he paid Farnsworth $1 million in royalties for 10 years of access to his
patents, his legal history ons didn't just cost RCA money.
Either Farnsworth had signed a deal with at and T more than two years later,
allowing both parties mutual use of each other's patents auto did RCA lose
the patent water Farnsworth,
but they weren't even the first major company to win the use of his electronic
genius.
Farnsworth spent plenty of time on the defensive in the 1930s,
but he played a fair bit of offense too.
He traveled abroad quite often in certain of new partners that would help fund
his legal battles,
but he was also striking new deals and crafting new inventions. In 1934,
he made an agreement with the Germans to provide them with electronic video
equipment. As a result,
some of Farnsworth image dissector cameras helped broadcast the famous 1936
Olympic games in Berlin.
Farnsworth continued to advance his war work with electronic televisions,
inventing new upgrades and pieces that stabilized and advanced the fledgling
technology. His pattern record shows scores of new electron multiplier,
high power, projection tools, CA radios and absorption oscillators,
and all kinds of other early modern tools that help set the stage for a century
of small screen entertainment.
It was around this time when CO's weekly ran a feature on far worth,
noting that electrically scanned television was largely given to the world by a
19 year old boy from Utah.
The article goes on to say that today barely 30 years old,
he is setting the specialized world of so science on its ears.
It's easy to forget that at the close of the RCA saga in 1939,
Farmsworth wasn't even old enough yet to run for president.
He'd lived through so much intellectual conflict and started experimenting with
his work at such a young age that it experienced an entire lifetime's worth of
drama in just a few short decades.
And Farmsworth did still have a lot of gas left in the tank in 1938.
He founded Theon worth television and radio corporation in Fort Wayne, Indiana,
where he worked as the director of research.
His tinkering contributed to the invention of radar night, vision goggles,
electron microscopes, astronomical telescopes, gas scopes,
modern air traffic control systems,
and more in the 1960s even created an electrical field old called a fusel that
was capable of nuclear fusion.
But Farnsworth began to struggle with depression and substance abuse in the
1930s, perhaps it was the weight of his ongoing legal troubles,
the ups and downs of securing funding and running a business or the conflicted
nature of being a workaholic genius, who also has a wife and two kids,
whatever his stresses were. Farnsworth reportedly had a,
a nervous breakdown in the late 1930s.
He moved to a quiet place in Maine at the start of world war II,
temporarily abandoning his electronic pursuits to make wooden boxes that stored
ammunition,
basic tasks and simpler focus helped Farnsworth find a balance and return to its
passions. After the war in the late 1940s, Farnsworth television and radio,
this company based out of Indiana was struggling financially.
It was bought out and reorganized by international telephone and Telegraph in
1949.
Farnsworth remains on the board as a nominal vice president and continued to
tinker with his growing list of experiments.
But his health continued to decline. Over the years,
he became hyper focused on his nuclear fusion project in the 1960s,
hoping his Fusor could become a springboard to a practical fusion reactor
and an energy source it and T cuts his funding in 1967.
The Farnsworth moved back to Provo,
hoping that proximity to a university town could give him the contacts and
funding that he would need for a new venture.
Buty OT Farmsworth associates was bankrupt by 1970 and fines.
A drinking problem had become more serious than ever his life,
which had started with such bright electric promise had suddenly become twisted
and dark RCA.
The villain of his younger years had taken off as one of the leading creators of
radios and televisions,
utilizing farms Worth's patterns to become a dominating force that greatly
surpassed his own companies market profile.
He felt as though his work with fusion remains unfinished with the era of
independent scientists, passing him by,
he may have even felt sort of like a Relic of simpler times when hydroelectric
dams lit up quaint Western towns,
and people could only dream of watching the news in three dimensions.
His health was clearly failing him,
but he was given one last victory before the end of his life in 1969 in the
aftermath of the it and T closure far worth remained unsure of the value of his
legacy.
He had spent his life chasing the scientific pursuits that had stimulated his
sense of curiosity only to find conflict and depression.
He wondered if his life's work had really been worth it. Then on July the 20th,
1969,
Farnsworth was one of the 500 million people watching live on television as near
Armstrong and buzz Rin walked on the moon.
He WEPS telling his wife that watching such an incredible events on the device
that he visual is and invented has made a door worthwhile less than two
years later. Farnsworth died of pneumonia on March the 11th, 1971.
He was 64 years old. FI's wife Elma survived her husband by decades,
living beyond the millennium until her death. In 2006,
she spent most of the 35 years without her husband advocating for his legacy,
challenging RCAs claims to the television throne and fighting for meaningful
recognition for filo,
as technology continued to evolve at a faster and faster pace.
Thanks to her good work.
Farnsworth is widely credited today as the electronics genius that he was
several prominent awards are named after him, including a primetime engineering,
Emmy award, a Midwestern and cable TV competition,
and a collegiate broadcasting scholarship.
He was Postly inducted into the national inventor hall of fame and the
television academy hall of fame in 2013 for a time,
he was also one of the two bronze statues representing great American from the
state of Utah in the us Congress scientific American called him one of the 10
greatest mathematic of his generation and time named him as one of the hundred.
Most influential people of the 20th century Faloon worth may have struggled
to see his own value in his later years, as we all do from time to time,
but he never struggled to visualize his life's greatest work.
And he revolutionized news entertainment, art and communication in the process.
He truly was the Tony stark of his time.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below.
Don't forget to subscribe brand new videos,
just like this a couple of times a week, and please do check it off.
Fantastic sponsor Squarespace, who I will link to below.
And thank you for watching.